Underneath all these
unexamined assumptions,
it's really getting at the heart
of what we're talking about.
Because until we can really
look at those and explore those,
then we can make conscious
decisions about them.
The other thing I
think is an assumption
we make is that our worldview
is the only worldview.
And so there are other people.
There are other cultures.
There are groups that we
call indigenous people.
And these are people that
have a different worldview--
different assumptions--
a different way
of looking at the world.
Oftentimes, I find
that we can learn
more sometimes about ourselves
by seeing something different.
And then, oh, this is how I
am in relationship to that.
Now, we're going to look
at what might be considered
an unexamined
assumption that affects
our entire modern worldview.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
MALE NARRATOR (ON VIDEO): Of all
the countless assumptions that
make up our modern
industrial worldview,
there is one that is primary
and all-encompassing--
the assumption that we
are separate from everyone
and everything.
This assumption
shapes virtually all
of our perceptions and actions.
FEMALE NARRATOR (ON
VIDEO): Over the centuries,
the story that's
been communicated
in the modern world--
consciously or unconsciously--
has been that the world operates
like a huge machine-- made up
of separate parts
like a big clock.
For the past 400 years,
the scientific tradition
has been trying to take the
clock apart and figure out
how it works so we
can master it and use
it for our own purposes.
A mechanistic view meant
that-- instead of seeing
the interconnection
between things--
there was a way
of analyzing what
people were coming into contact
with and taking it apart.
So what evolved was
kind of a fragmented
view of the natural world.
And we became hypnotized,
really, with the power that
came out of this technology.
And we lost our
connection to each other.
We lost our connection to
the mystery of universe.
There's a fundamental
misconception
that we are separate.
We're learning that's not true.
If there's only one, then
whatever I do to you,
I do to me.
If there's only one, whatever
I do to the air, I do to me.
If there's only one,
whatever I do in society
is what I'm actually doing to
myself-- doing to my family--
doing to my children.
MALE NARRATOR (ON VIDEO):
Spiritual traditions
have long taught that
separation is an illusion.
Buddhist teacher Thich
Nhat Hanh puts it this way.
MALE NARRATOR (ON
VIDEO): Increasingly,
people in the modern
world are listening
to the voices of
indigenous people,
whose message has always been
that all things are connected.
We use another terminology
called [NON-ENGLISH LANGUAGE]
is all my relations.
We try to recognize that we
are related to everything--
to the animals, to the fish,
to the plants, to the trees,
to the birds-- even
the microorganisms.
So that we are all related.
The foundational
understanding from my point
of view or indigenous
point of view
is that you are a
part of that land
in a very interdependent way.
You are a part of the land.
And it's your body.
It's you.
And you can't do things to
the land that in the end
comes back and destroys you.
MALE NARRATOR (ON VIDEO):
This deep recognition
of interconnection is supported
by the current scientific
understanding of the origin of
the universe-- which has shown
that all of creation is
profoundly connected at both
the macro and micro level.
We can see that everything
that ever was, is, or will be
was compressed into a space
smaller than a seed-- tinier
than a tear-- more
minuscule than a molecule.
All space-- all time--
and the potential
for everything that
would ever exist
started as a single point.
So in a very real sense, science
has discovered what indigenous
people have known all along.
We are all one.
We are all connected.
We all come from the
very same source.
Everything we see
around us has developed
from the boiling cauldron
of the early Earth--
a sphere of lava that
miraculously gave rise
to the sea and the
atmosphere-- and then life
and its infinite expressions.
As Brian Swimme says, the
earth was once molten rock
and now sings operas.
It is not the case that
the earth was assembled.
And then we were
added to the earth.
And it was there
for our purposes.
But rather, we came
out of the earth.
We are the universe in
the form of a human.
And it's true of everyone.
It's an amazing new
understanding of ourselves that
is so profoundly inclusive.
And everyone is part of this.
Everything is part of this.
And we discover, as well,
a profound kinship--
that no matter what being we're
talking about on the planet,
we are related.
We're related in
terms of energy.
terms of genetics.
We're all, in one way or
another, like a form of kin.
And that-- I just--
it's overwhelming.
So it's just now coming
into human awareness.
It's going to take
a lot of reflection
to embody this fully.
But it is a massive change
in human consciousness.
MALE NARRATOR (ON VIDEO):
Seeing ourselves as separate
has had devastating consequences
on the planet and all of life.
Now, a new story about who
we are as a planetary family
is beginning to shape the
consciousness on Earth.
Looking at our history
through this lens,
it could be said that
human beings have
been tragically mistaken--
rather than being
fundamentally flawed.
This is good news, because
there's not much hope
for an innately flawed species.
But there is hope for
one that is recognized
and is waking up from a trance.
That creates some powerful new
possibilities for the future.
And then, as we've
seen, the video
does a fantastic
job of illustrating
that the assumption that we
have here in the modern world
of separation is not
the assumption that's
carried by all
other worldviews--
all other peoples in the world.
And it could be that we see
that this particular assumption
of separation is a
large contributing
factor to the last
centuries of human history--
which have seen one
group of human beings
exploit and dominate and
oppress other groups.
And maybe, what's
happening now is
we're beginning to wake up
and see that assumption is not
an accurate assumption
for us to carry
and work from and behave from.
And that's the exciting moment.
And I love the
piece in that video
where we see that, actually,
as a species, we're not flawed.
We're simply mistaken.
It's as if we've gone off
along the wrong track.
And the good news about
that is we can change that.
We can understand that.
We can unravel that.
And we can choose again.
And so we're actually in
a profoundly exciting time
of re-orienting our
fundamental thinking
and our behaviors as a species.
So I think we recognize
this story coming to us
in a number of different ways.
And this new story beginning
to shape the consciousness here
on the planet.
And it-- and it's as if when
we identify this connection--
this sense that we're all
part of one unified whole
that the behaviors, which
previously would have been
an assault on the planet or
an assault on each other,
become unimaginable.
So this sense of
interconnection allows us
to re-choose behaviors in
every aspect of our lives.
So we're going to do
something a little bit
different-- that's
going to require
us to change up the space.
FEMALE NARRATOR (ON VIDEO): At
this point in the symposium,
we do an experiential
exercise created by author
and activist Joanna Macy.
This milling exercise gives
participants the opportunity
to directly experience the
feelings of both separation
and connection.
JON SYMES: Breathe deeply.
And once again, find
a quiet receptive
space inside of yourself.
See if you can allow your
mind to be calm and centered.
And now, I invite you
to slowly open your eyes
and imagine that
you're downtown.
It's lunch break.
And you've got some errands to
run before you go back to work.
So I'd like you begin
now to move around
inside of this space as if you
are in that lunchtime things
to do.
And remember, you've got
a lot of things to do.
And it's only a
short lunch break.
So actually, you
need to get a move on
to get to all the places you
need to go to get back and be
back in time before anybody
discovers that you've
actually taken longer.
And you might not
be as competent
as they thought you were.
So there's lots to do--
lots to do-- lots to do--
and only a short
time to get it done.
If you don't get back in time
with all these jobs done,
there's a fair chance
everything will fall apart.
And now, I invite you to
just slow down a little-- to
perhaps, what would be
a more normal pace--
but to keep walking.
And let yourself feel
now-- feeling your body
right now-- whatever you're
experiencing and whatever
the changes to this
place from where
you were just a moment ago.
Then, I invite you
to find yourself
in front of one other person.
Enjoy looking at this person.
And if you choose
to, hold their hand.
Behold, this
brother-- this sister.
Behold this wonderful person.
You're looking into
the face of someone
who deeply feels what's
truly going on in our world
right now.
Like you, this person
understands the full situation
facing the earth and facing
the human species at this time.
They understand the
changes in the environment.
They see-- they get the
rampant social injustice.
They feel the disconnection
amongst people.
And yet, they haven't
closed their eyes.
They haven't turned away.
This is someone like
you who is choosing
to love the gift of being
alive in this time--
with all of its challenges.
Allow yourself now to experience
what it feels like to recognize
that you're not
alone-- what it feels
like to feel yourself
connected in this deep way
with other people.
ANITA SANCHEZ: I understand that
there's much that could be said
from what you just experienced.
What I'd like to do is
allow for-- if someone
would like to share what that
experience was like for you.
I noticed I always
keep a background
sense of being separate.
And that this was an
opportunity to drop that.
And what was available was
love-- kind of embarrassing,
almost, how much I loved
this man in a moment
and this entire group.
I-- I feel very touched by the
opportunity to really connect--
and at the ease at
which we can, as people,
connect-- simply by making
eye contact in a moment.
Words don't feel necessary.
Explanations don't
feel necessary.
Context even feels optional.
It just feels pure.
It feels simple.
And it feels truth.
I just had a real
sense of belonging.
And even thinking about the
word versus separation--
and just the ease which
to let go of separation--
and just belonging.
And now, I'm contemplating
what that word actually
means in the deeper sense.